---
layout: post
title:  "What is a Desktop Game | Updates"
date:   2023-08-21 11:27:00 -0700
categories: game theory, user interface, computer gaming
published: true
---

The framework for personal computer games has changed over the years and 
I've identified three overarching types of PC game that I find 
interesting. At the top of my thesis is what I call a "desktop game", a 
type of game that has been true to its nature since the dawn of desktop 
environments. A desktop game reflects the fact that it exists in a 
window alongside other windows, a desktop, a taskbar, etc.. The earliest 
games of this type include Minesweeper and Solitaire, but also include 
many games people shouldn't derivatively call "casual", like Tetris 
clones or early Bungie titles like _Pathways into Darkness_.

By contrast, the type of game I'm calling a "pseudodesktop" game tends 
to do strange things to the desktop environment. Many will attempt to 
enter a "fullscreen" mode that desktops usually aren't designed for and 
often wreaks havoc with resolution settings and has the potential to put 
the computer in a "crashed" or "frozen" state. These types of game also 
"grab" user input which can create UI problems where the user is unsure 
of how to regain control of their mouse or keyboard for normal use.

Pseudodesktop games are essentiall trying to act like console games. 
This is an assertion PC purists might take issue with, but the fact 
players of these games would rather the game take up the entire screen, 
intercept all input devices, and presumably not be interrupted by other 
desktop processes like notifications and background programs; all 
suggest that the player would rather be running the game in a clean 
environment dedicated to performing the single task of running this one 
game. Which brings me to my final type of PC game which I will call 
"computer games".

Computer games are from the bygone, yet fairly recent, era of DOS and 
MS-DOS games before the multi-tasking desktop environment came into 
prominence. If you started playing _Doom_ or _Warcraft II_, that was all 
your user interface would be doing until you quit the game. These games 
were necessarily fullscreen, because they were the only thing running at 
one time. They had access to all user inputs by virtue of being the one 
program that is running. No background programs or notifications 
threatened to wrestle back control of your monitor.

Of the three types, I think desktop games are an interesting and 
underexplored type of PC game. Start one up, and you should expect it to 
behave in the little window you have given it, never messing with your 
resolution or stealing any of your user inputs. In their purest form, 
they might only accept mouse input since that's the main language of the 
desktop environment, but accepting keyboard input when it has focus is 
perfectly fine as well. A joystick or gamepad connected to the computer 
might expect to be fully slaved to whatever game is running, but the 
topic of joysticks and desktop games is a topic worth exploring in more 
depth than this short essay.

Post Backlog
------------

I have a couple of near-complete posts from 2022 and 2023 waiting to be 
pushed to this blog, including a short tutorial on how to get started 
writing a standalone LibRetro core in C. Those will be posted as soon as 
I finish them.

Current Developments
--------------------

I've been doing a lot of work with the System Reference Document and 
Open Game Content publish by _Wizards of the Coast_ in the early-to-mid 
2000s. A post related to that effort, including some instructions on how 
to navigate the copyright landscape of Open Game Content, will be 
forthcoming.

I'm also developing a small minigolf game in JavaScript as a tribute to 
the Java applets that used to be the Internet's foremost interactive 
media aside from Flash games. It'll be an integral part of my online 
arcade project and hopefully the first of a few applet-style games 
included in my upcoming online arcade.
