---
layout: post
title:   "Drafting a Flexible Class System"
date:   2023-07-21 07:30:00 -0800
categories: dungeons & dragons, dnd, homebrew
published: true
---

A little over a month ago, I started work on generalizing the d20 system 
for use in a wider array of genres. The core rules for the 3rd edition 
of Dungeons & Dragons was granted for third-party use under the terms of 
the Open Game License in 2000 thru 2003 as the System Reference Document 
(SRD). The fantasy game has since been transformed into new properties 
like d20 Modern, Star Wars RPG, and Pathfinder. I wanted to take a crack 
at it myself.

The SRD presents a versitile system that has been molded to fit a 
specific vision. The first hurdle I took on was the class system: the 
carefully balanced and genre-specific collection of core classes and 
prestige classes that make it *Dungeons & Dragons*. After trying a few 
times to identify a genre-agnostic motifs to use as a foundation to 
build on, I settled on the idea of beginning with three generic classes 
based on the three ability scores that are *not* associated with saving 
throws: Strength, Intelligence, and Charisma.

This decision was rather arbitrary. I often use math and logical 
associations to understand a system or make design decisions. I also 
took a look at what a typical party of D&D characters is expected to 
consist of, and came up with a set of names referencing the Serenity 
Prayer (because it happened to line up).

- The Strength (Str): fighter and protector of the party
- The Courage (Cha): healer and negotiator of the party
- The Wisdom (Int): expert and brains of the party

The names were not going to stick, since they would be confused with 
ability names. At some point I stumbled upon an assertion in the 
*Dungeon Master's Guide*: apparently you are encouraged as a DM to 
create unique worlds where the fantasy races have unusual limitations, 
like perhaps a world where dwarves and half-orcs don't have access to 
half of the spellcasting classes. However, the same section of the book 
mentions that there are three classes considered *fundamental* to 
culture in D&D: the fighter, the cleric, and the rogue.

This let me know I was on the right track, because those three classes 
line up neatly with what I was working on. It also makes plenty of 
logical sense. The d20 system fundamentally needs in each party of 
adventurers a fighter, a healer, and a lockpicker; the glass cannon of 
wizards being important but not exactly fundamental.

In figuring out which features each class should have, I avoided the 
potential pitfall of pigeonholing any of them, treating each as a 
*theme* rather than a proscription. The fighter should be allowed to be 
an outdoorsman if needed, and the expert should be allowed some combat 
prowess if the player wants an assassin type. To facilitate this, I 
opted to do something similar to d20 Modern and grant each class bonus 
feats akin to the core class fighter and special abilities akin to the 
core class rogue.

These next three parts are where math and logical associations come back 
in. I had three classes; what better way to distinguish them from each 
other than to use the three saving throws of the SRD? I decided to give 
each of them *two* good saving throws: the new fighter gets Fortitude 
and Reflex, like the core class ranger. The new healer gets Fortitude 
and Will, like the core class cleric. The new expert gets Reflex and 
Will, like the core class bard. Mathematically the only three 
combinations of (pick two) Fortitude, Reflex, and Will line up 
satisfyingly.

But how was I going to design and assign and entire system of special 
abilities? I asked myself. Luckily, a lot of work had already been done 
for me. d20 Modern has a "talent" system, where each of six basic 
classes have access to a unique collection of special abilities they can 
gain. Several of them are even based on the core class rogue's special 
abilities; a clear connection to what I needed. But which of my three 
classes should have access to which special abilties?

The answer was rather satisfying. d20 Modern did something similar to my 
ability-based core class list. Their six classes were each based on an 
ability score. There's a charismatic hero, a smart hero, a tough hero, 
etc.. My classes were originally associated with ability scores, too. 
Voila! I categorized the special abilities based on their associated 
ability score. Now any class can be granted access to special abilities 
via a simple association or limitation. My three classes can gain a 
special ability if its category is the class's foundational ability *or* 
the ability associated with either of its good saving throws.

- The Fighter: Strength, Dexterity (Ref), or Constitution (Fort).
- The Healer: Charisma, Constitution (Fort), or Wisdom (Will).
- The Expert: Intelligence, Dexterity (Ref), or Wisdom (Will).

This results in some overlap, but satisfies some generalization and 
logical association as well. For instance: the fighter can have some 
dodging and stabbing abilities like the expert; the healer can gain some 
damage resistance like the figher, and the expert has access to some 
healing abilities like the healer. Nothing wrong with an expert knowing 
some first aid and a fighter knowing some martial arts.

My intention is that in exchange for having fewer classes to choose 
from, players will appreciate the flexibility of these classes: the 
ability to make a meaningful choice of core concept while being able to 
fill nearly any role they want their character to fill. The only way to 
find out is to rope some of my associates into a series of playtests and 
feedbacks. Until next time.
